<c:if test="true"
  xmlns:c="http://java.sun.com/jstl/core"
  xmlns:nxu="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/util"
  xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets">

<c:if test="false">
Template displaying an action depending of its type (@since 5.6).

Since 5.7, also generates a javascript function to handle confimation message.

Parameters:
- action: the action instance (mandatory)
- idPrefix: a String prefix to put before the action id (optional but
  recommanded)
- actionType (optional): type to use if not set on action or needs to be
  used by default if not set on action

Display options:
- hideIcon: hide the icon associated to the action if any. Defaults to false.
- hideLabel: hide the label associated to the action if any. Defaults to false.
- useButton: use a command button instead of a command link. Defaults to false.
  This behaviour is only supported by actions with type 'link'.
- useAjaxForm: boolean expression whether the action is done in an ajax form:
  the action will be executed via an action listener to prevent any
  navigation that would remove the ajax behaviour, defaults to false.
  This behaviour is only supported by actions with type 'link'.
- actionStyleClass: additional style class to put on link

Templating zone that can be filled when useAjaxForm is set to false (default):
- inside_action

Templating zones that can be filled when useAjaxForm is set to true:
- before_action_trigger
- after_action_trigger

TODO:
- document properties used on actions (fancybox, style class)

</c:if>


<script type="text/javascript">
  function confirm#{idPrefix}#{nxu:jsfTagIdEscape(action.id)}Message() {
    message = "#{nxu:translate(action.properties.confirmMessage, action.properties.confirmMessageArgs)}";
    if (message != "") {
      return confirm(message);
    }
    return true;
  }
</script>

<nxu:set var="actionConfirmMessageJs"
  value="if (!confirm#{idPrefix}#{nxu:jsfTagIdEscape(action.id)}Message()) return false;"
  cache="true">
  <c:choose>

    <c:when test="#{action.type == 'bare_link' or (empty action.type and actionType == 'bare_link')}">
      <ui:include src="bare_link_action_template.xhtml" />
    </c:when>

    <c:when test="#{action.type == 'fancybox' or (empty action.type and actionType == 'fancybox')}">
      <ui:include src="fancybox_action_template.xhtml" />
    </c:when>

    <c:when test="#{action.type == 'widget' or (empty action.type and actionType == 'widget')}">
      <ui:include src="widget_action_template.xhtml" />
    </c:when>

    <c:when test="#{action.type == 'rest_document_link' or (empty action.type and actionType == 'rest_document_link')}">
      <ui:include src="rest_document_link_action_template.xhtml" />
    </c:when>

    <c:when test="#{action.type == 'template' or (empty action.type and actionType == 'template')}">
      <ui:include src="template_action_template.xhtml" />
    </c:when>

    <c:when test="#{action.type == 'main_tab' or (empty action.type and actionType == 'main_tab')}">
      <ui:include src="main_tab_action_template.xhtml" />
    </c:when>

    <c:if test="false">
      Use a link by default (also used if type is unknown)
    </c:if>
    <c:otherwise>
      <ui:include src="link_action_template.xhtml" />
    </c:otherwise>

  </c:choose>
</nxu:set>

</c:if>
