<div xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
  xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
  xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
  xmlns:nxu="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/util"
  xmlns:nxd="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/document"
  xmlns:nxh="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/html"
  xmlns:c="http://java.sun.com/jstl/core"
  xmlns:fn="http://java.sun.com/jsp/jstl/functions"
  xmlns:a4j="https://ajax4jsf.dev.java.net/ajax"
  xmlns:nxl="http://nuxeo.org/nxforms/layout">

<c:if test="false">
  Template rendering a layout listing and actions, with an enclosing form
  depending on given parameters.

  Parameters:
  - documents: the page selections instance, mandatory
  - providerId: page provider id, used to manage duplicates when rendering
    the same page provider several times in the same page, optional
  - layoutName: layout to use for listing rendering, mandatory
  - selectedResultLayoutColumns: list of result column names to display,
    optional, defaults to the layout default columns configuration.
  - removeForm: if set to true, do not enclose the listing with a form
    (optional, available since 5.5, defaults to false).
  - useAjaxForm: if removeForm is not set or set to false, use an ajax form if
    set to true. This will have an impact on selection actions as they will be
    using ajax calls. (optional, available since 5.6, defaults to false).
  - useAjaxPagination: use ajax links for page navigation controls when set to
    true (optional, available since 5.6, defaults to false).
  - contentIdToBeReRendered: mandatory id(s) of components to re-render
    when using an ajax form, mandatory if parameter usingAjaxForm is set to
    true (available since 5.6).
  - hideTopPaginationControls: only display the bottom page selectors
    (available since 5.6).
</c:if>

<c:if test="#{documents != null}">

  <nxu:set var="uniqueFormId"
    value="#{documents.name}_#{providerId}"
    cache="true">
  <nxu:set var="formId"
    value="#{nxu:test(empty providerId or providerId == 0, documents.name, uniqueFormId)}"
    cache="true">

    <c:if test="#{not removeForm}">
      <c:if test="#{not useAjaxForm}">
        <h:form id="#{formId}">
          <ui:include src="documents_layout_table_content.xhtml" />
        </h:form>
        <f:subview id="#{formId}_buttons">
          <ui:insert name="buttons" />
        </f:subview>
      </c:if>
      <c:if test="#{useAjaxForm}">
        <h:form id="#{formId}" ajaxSubmit="true"
          reRender="#{contentIdToBeReRendered}">
          <ui:include src="documents_layout_table_content.xhtml" />
        </h:form>
        <f:subview id="#{formId}_buttons">
          <ui:insert name="buttons" />
        </f:subview>
      </c:if>
    </c:if>

    <c:if test="#{removeForm}">
      <ui:include src="documents_layout_table_content.xhtml" />
      <f:subview id="#{formId}_buttons">
        <ui:insert name="buttons" />
      </f:subview>
    </c:if>

    <ui:include src="/incl/popupMenu.xhtml">
      <ui:param name="popupMenuId" value="#{formId}" />
    </ui:include>
    <script>
      setupContextMenu("table td div div.popupTarget", "#{formId}_popupMenu");
    </script>

  </nxu:set>
  </nxu:set>

</c:if>

</div>