<c:if test="true"
  xmlns:nxu="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/util"
  xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
  xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
  xmlns:a4j="http://richfaces.org/a4j"
  xmlns:rich="http://richfaces.org/rich"
  xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
  xmlns:c="http://java.sun.com/jstl/core"
  xmlns:nxh="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/html"
  xmlns:nxl="http://nuxeo.org/nxforms/layout"
  xmlns:nxd="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/document">

  <h2 id="" alt="Messages">Messages</h2>
  <p class="specification">Feedback, status and help messages are used to communicate with users after a task: to confirm that a task has been done, to tell that the platform is processing the task and needs a bit more time, to ask users to do the task one more time as the request couldn't be performed, to show users what actions can be done and where, or to indicate the state of a document.
   A feedback message is always a good way to show users what happened or what is happening: the content of the message is as important than the presence of the message itself. The fewer surprise there is during a process, the more intuitive the interface will be.</p>

  <div class="gridRow">
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle7">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h3 id="" alt="Messages">Feedback messages</h3>
        <p class="specification">Feedback messages showing a global status are displayed in the top right corner of the window.
         Use the <span class="code">.facesStatusMessage</span> and add a secundary class for the type of your message: <span class="code">.infoMessage</span>, <span class="code">.successMessage</span>, <span class="code">.warningMessage</span>, or <span class="code">.errorMessage</span>.
         If you want to display a feedback message under a field in a form, use only the class of the message type.</p>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle6">
          <div class="widgetPanel">
            <div class="infoMessage">Your workspace is created</div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle6">
          <div class="widgetPanel">
            <div class="successMessage">Your task is achieved</div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle6">
          <div class="widgetPanel">
            <div class="warningMessage">The task will expired today</div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle6">
          <div class="widgetPanel">
            <div class="errorMessage">Invalid password</div>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle5">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h3 id="" alt="Messages">Label highlights</h3>
        <p class="specification">To highlight just a word or a sentence in a paragraph, here is a list of classes that you can use on inline elements like <span class="code">span</span> tags.</p>
        <p class="specification">Four classes are available to highlight your words: <span class="code">.success</span>, <span class="code">.avert</span>, <span class="code">.warning</span>, and <span class="code">.error</span> .</p>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
          <span class="success">Document unlocked</span>
        </div>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
          <span class="avert">Draft state</span>
        </div>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
          <span class="warning">Document locked</span>
        </div>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
          <span class="error">Deleted document</span>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="clear" />
  </div>
  
   <div class="gridRow">
     <div class="gridBox gridStyle7">
       <div class="widgetPanel">
       <h3 id="" alt="Messages">Status messages</h3>
       <p class="specification">If you need to show a feedback or status message in a modal pop-up, or at the end of a process in a screen, status messages will be helpful to tell users what they did and, most of all, to explain what is happening next.</p>
       <p class="specification">
         Define your message with a <span class="code">.processMessage</span> div class, then add a secondary class to display the corresponding icon that will define the type of your message to users.
          Five classes are available to define a status message: <span class="code">.completeSuccess</span>, <span class="code">.completeError</span>, <span class="code">.completeWarning</span>, <span class="code">.running</span>,  and <span class="code">.scheduled</span>.
       </p>
       <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
         <div class="processMessage completeSuccess">Your process is complete, you can continue.</div>
       </div>
       <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
         <div class="processMessage completeError">Your process contains an error, please relaunch the process.</div>
       </div>
       <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
         <div class="processMessage completeWarning">Your process has a warning state, be careful and don't forget to save.</div>
       </div>
       <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
         <div class="processMessage running">Your process is running, please be patient.</div>
       </div>
       <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
         <div class="processMessage scheduled">Your process is scheduled, please don't run another heavy action.</div>
      </div>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle5">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h3 alt="Messages">Specification, details and help messages</h3>
        <p class="specification">At last, some complementary classes are available to add a detail, make a field more explicit, or help users understand a specific action.</p>
        <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
          <table class="dataTableLine">
            <tbody>
              <tr>
                <td><a onclick="return false;" href="#"><span class="code">.detail</span></a></td>
                <td><div class="detail">A detail under a field in a form</div></td>
              </tr>
              <tr>
                <td><a onclick="return false;" href="#"><span class="code">.quote</span></a></td>
                <td><div class="quote">A quote, or a description</div></td>
              </tr>
              <tr>
                <td><a onclick="return false;" href="#"><span class="code">.specification</span></a></td>
                <td><div class="specification">A specification paragraph, the default opening paragraph class</div></td>
              </tr>
              <tr>
                <td><a onclick="return false;" href="#"><span class="code">.widgetHelpLabel</span></a></td>
                <td><div class="widgetHelpLabel" title="With a tooltip to help">A widget help label in a form.</div> Roll over it to see the tooltip from the title attribute!</td>
              </tr>
            </tbody>
          </table>
          <div class="tips">A <span class="code">.tips</span> class to use in a foldable box or a gadget</div>
          <div class="dropArea">A <span class="code">.dropArea</span> div to show users where to drop documents</div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="clear" />
  </div>

  <script>
    jQuery(document).ready(function() {
      jQuery("div.widgetHelpLabel[title]").tooltip({relative: true, position: 'bottom center'});
    });
  </script>

</c:if>

