<c:if test="true"
  xmlns:nxu="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/util"
  xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
  xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
  xmlns:a4j="http://richfaces.org/a4j"
  xmlns:rich="http://richfaces.org/rich"
  xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
  xmlns:c="http://java.sun.com/jstl/core"
  xmlns:nxh="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/html"
  xmlns:nxl="http://nuxeo.org/nxforms/layout"
  xmlns:nxd="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/document">

  <h2 id="Recommendations" alt="Recommendations">Recommendations</h2>

  <p class="specification">Before starting to design a page, please read these basic rules to follow the Nuxeo User Interface guideline. These are global principles that you should keep in mind when you design new page or customize any platform feature to make your application consistent, intuitive and user-friendly.</p>

  <div class="gridRow">
    <h3>If you should remember only one: Be consistent </h3>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle4">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h5>Users need to learn, but quickly</h5>
        <p class="specification">End users need some time to get familiar with a new application and learn how to use it. This is normal and it is a good sign showing that the adoption of the platform by users is in progress. However, you have to give enough clues to users to let them learn independently. The shortest this learning time will be, the more confident users will feel with your platform. Be consistent in your wording, and always provide feedback.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle4">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h5>Users hate surprises</h5>
        <p class="specification">Always use the same UI patterns. An interface needs to be predictable to give a feeling of stability to the user. Try to always have the same way to display actions, page layouts, data tables and listings. Define UI patterns and apply them everywhere you need. It will also be a great indicator to see if something is not clear for users.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle4">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h5>Users hate to wait</h5>
        <p class="specification">As a user, you don't like it when you have to wait before you can do an action. This point doesn't only depend on the platform performance. The time you need to find something on the screen is also a part of the performance feeling. So be clear in your wording, don't drown your users in a bunch of icons, be consistent in how you display and organize actions and in your layout.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="clear" />
  </div>

  <div class="gridRow">
    <h3>Always think to your audience</h3>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle7">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h5>The "five W" rules</h5>
        <p class="specification">During your customization process, always ask yourself:</p>
        <ul class="visibleList">
          <li><span class="bold">Who</span>: who is the end user?</li>
          <li><span class="bold">What</span>: what problem will this feature solve?</li>
          <li><span class="bold">Where</span>: where does the existing interface need to be improved?</li>
          <li><span class="bold">When</span>: when do you need to show it?</li>
          <li><span class="bold">Why</span>: why does the solution you designed solve the problem?</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle5">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h5>User's level of experience</h5>
        <p class="specification">Your audience will never consist in a single kind of user. There will always be people who already know a process, and people who will discover it. So once your customization is ready, always ask yourself if all the steps of your page, feature or task are easy to understand and quickly doable.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="clear" />
  </div>

  <div class="gridRow">
    <h3>Display marks and clues to know where you are</h3>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle12">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <p class="specification">Users hate to feel lost. Even if your feature works great, you can't consider the feature as efficient if the user has no marks to identify where he is.</p>
        <ul class="visibleList">
          <li><span class="bold">Titles</span>: you page or modal window has to have a title.</li>
          <li><span class="bold">Back links</span>: make sure that user will always be able to come back to a previous step or screen with the browser's Back button or a back link.</li>
          <li><span class="bold">Actions</span>: always provide a close button on modal window, or a cancel button in forms.</li>
        </ul>
        <p class="specification">For each development, be sure to be <span class="bold">consistent, simple and clear</span>.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="clear" />
  </div>

  <div class="gridRow">
    <h3>Coding rules</h3>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle4">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h5>Never use br tags</h5>
        <p class="specification">The <span class="code">br</span> tag is a lure. Even if you think it is a temporary solution, it will never help your designer style any element, he will remove it. You need to start a new paragraph? Use a new <span class="code">p</span> tag. </p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle4">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h5>Code quality</h5>
        <p class="specification">There are generally many contributors on a project, we need to follow a set of coding rules to finish each project successfully. See the code quality page on <a href="http://doc.nuxeo.com/x/Ogk7" target="_blank">doc.nuxeo.com</a>.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="gridBox gridStyle4">
      <div class="widgetPanel">
        <h5>Coding and design guidelines</h5>
        <p class="specification">For any other coding guidelines, read the online documentation available about this topic on the <a href="http://doc.nuxeo.com/x/GIBH" target="_blank">Nuxeo Documentation Center</a>.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="clear" />
  </div>

</c:if>

