<c:if test="true"
  xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
  xmlns:c="http://java.sun.com/jstl/core"
  xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
  xmlns:nxu="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/util"
  xmlns:nxl="http://nuxeo.org/nxforms/layout">

<c:if test="false">
Template displaying an action depending of its type (@since 5.6).

Since 5.7, also generates a javascript function to handle confimation message.

Parameters:
- action: the action instance (mandatory)
- idPrefix: a String prefix to put before the action id (optional)
- actionType (optional): type to use if not set on action or needs to be
  used by default if not set on action
- mode: the rendering mode for potential widgets created via actions (optional):
  defaults to 'view'.

Display options:
- hideIcon: hide the icon associated to the action if any. Defaults to false.
- hideLabel: hide the label associated to the action if any. Defaults to false.
- useButton: use a command button instead of a command link. Defaults to false.
  This behaviour is only supported by actions with type 'link'.
- addForm: boolean expresion stating if a form is added around the action, to
  handle lookup level when retrieving the nxu:valueHolder component, and to
  generate simple ids when the form id is unique anyway, ignoring the idPrefix
  parameter
- useAjaxForm: boolean expression if the action is done in an ajax form:
  the action will be executed via an action listener to prevent any
  navigation that would remove the ajax behaviour, defaults to false.
  This behaviour is only supported by actions with type 'link' or 'button'.
- formStyleClass: additional style class to put on the form
- ajaxReRender: reRender ids if useAjaxForm is true. Available since 5.7.
- actionStyleClass: additional style class to put on link.
- clickedActionIdHolder: id of the nxu:valueHolder component holding the
  clicked action id reference.
- onSubmit: javascript to be called when the form is submitted. e.g. safeEdit
  cleanup after form submit.

Templating zone that can be filled when useAjaxForm is set to false (default):
- inside_action

Templating zones that can be filled when useAjaxForm is set to true:
- before_action_trigger
- after_action_trigger

</c:if>

<nxu:set var="defActionWidgetName" value="#{idPrefix}#{nxu:jsfTagIdEscape(action.id)}">
<nxu:set var="actionWidgetName" value="#{nxu:test(formAdded, nxu:jsfTagIdEscape(action.id), defActionWidgetName)}">
<nxu:set var="actionConfirmMessageJs"
  value="if (!confirm#{actionWidgetName}Message()) return false;"
  cache="true">

  <c:if test="#{not empty action.properties.confirmMessage}">
    <script type="text/javascript">
      function confirm#{actionWidgetName}Message() {
        message = "#{nxu:translate(action.properties.confirmMessage, action.properties.confirmMessageArgs)}";
        if (message != "") {
          return confirm(message);
        }
        return true;
      }
    </script>
  </c:if>

  <nxu:set var="actionReRender"
    value="#{action.properties.ajaxReRender}"
    resolveTwice="true">
  <nxl:widgetType category="jsfAction"
    name="#{nxu:test(empty action.type, nxu:test(empty actionType, 'link', actionType), action.type)}"
    mode="#{empty mode?'view':mode}"
    widgetName="#{actionWidgetName}"
    hideIcon="#{hideIcon}"
    hideLabel="#{hideLabel}"
    useButton="#{useButton}"
    useAjaxForm="#{useAjaxForm and action.properties.ajaxSupport}"
    formAdded="#{formAdded}"
    actionStyleClass="#{actionStyleClass}"
    clickedActionIdHolder="#{clickedActionIdHolder}"
    value="#{fieldOrValue}"
    resolveOnly="true">
    <nxu:set var="ajaxReRender"
      value="#{nxu:joinRender(ajaxReRender, nxu:componentAbsoluteId(component, actionReRender))}">
    <nxu:set var="addForm"
      value="#{action.properties.containsKey('addForm') ? action.properties.addForm : addForm}"
      resolveTwice="true">
    <nxu:set var="useAjaxForm"
      value="#{empty useAjaxForm and action.properties.containsKey('useAjaxForm') ? action.properties.useAjaxForm : useAjaxForm}"
      resolveTwice="true">
    <nxu:set var="discardForm"
      value="#{action.properties.containsKey('discardSurroundingForm') ? discardSurroundingForm : widget.properties.discardSurroundingForm}"
      resolveTwice="true">
    <nxu:set var="supportAjax"
      value="#{action.properties.containsKey('ajaxSupport') ? action.properties.ajaxSupport : widget.properties.supportAjax}"
      resolveTwice="true">
    <nxu:set var="disableMultipartForm"
      value="#{action.properties.containsKey('disableMultipartForm') ? action.properties.disableMultipartForm : widget.properties.disableMultipartForm}"
      resolveTwice="true">
    <nxu:set var="disableDoubleClickShield"
      value="#{action.properties.containsKey('disableDoubleClickShield') ? action.properties.disableDoubleClickShield : widget.properties.disableDoubleClickShield}"
      resolveTwice="true" >
      <nxu:form id="#{widget.id}_form"
        skip="#{!addForm or (discardForm and !useAjaxForm)}"
        useAjaxForm="#{useAjaxForm and supportAjax}"
        disableMultipartForm="#{disableMultipartForm}"
        styleClass="#{formStyleClass}"
        disableDoubleClickShield="#{disableDoubleClickShield}">
        <nxl:widget widget="#{widget}" value="#{fieldOrValue}" />
      </nxu:form>
    </nxu:set>
    </nxu:set>
    </nxu:set>
    </nxu:set>
    </nxu:set>
    </nxu:set>
    </nxu:set>
  </nxl:widgetType>
  </nxu:set>

</nxu:set>
</nxu:set>
</nxu:set>

</c:if>