<c:if test="true"
  xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
  xmlns:c="http://java.sun.com/jstl/core"
  xmlns:nxu="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/util"
  xmlns:nxh="http://nuxeo.org/nxweb/html"
  xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
  xmlns:a4j="http://richfaces.org/a4j"
  xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
  xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html">

<c:if test="false">
Template displaying an action button (@since 5.6).

Since 5.7, also generates a javascript function to handle confimation message.

Parameters:
- action: the action instance (mandatory)
- idPrefix: a String prefix to put before the action id (optional)
- useAjaxForm: boolean expression whether the action is done in an ajax form:
  the action will be executed via an action listener to prevent any
  navigation that would remove the ajax behaviour, defaults to false.
- ajaxReRender: reRender ids if useAjaxForm is true. Available since 5.7.
- actionsDisplay: if set to 'buttons', action will be displayed as a command
  button. If set to 'links', action will be displayed as a command link. If set
  to 'icons', action will be displayed as an icon. Else (default behaviour),
  action will be displayed as its types define, but some types may not be able
  to follow this instruction. If action type is empty, action will be displayed
  as a command link and display its icon when defined.

Templating zone that can be filled when useAjaxForm is set to false (default):
- inside_action

Templating zones that can be filled when useAjaxForm is set to true:
- before_action_trigger
- after_action_trigger
</c:if>

  <ui:include src="/incl/action/generic_action_template.xhtml">
    <ui:param name="useButton" value="#{actionsDisplay == 'buttons'}" />
    <ui:param name="hideLabel" value="#{actionsDisplay == 'icons'}" />
    <ui:param name="hideIcon" value="#{actionsDisplay == 'buttons' or actionsDisplay == 'links'}" />
  </ui:include>

</c:if>